To start with some opening remarks, keeping them short,
one to two minutes, and then we will, um,
have questions for members. Thank you.
So Tina, I'm Denise Bates
and I'm the chair of the Real Estate Authority Board.
I'm here today with Belinda Moffit, uh,
r e's Chief Executive.
Uh, and we are going to both be presenting the annual
review briefing about 20, 23, 24 year.
I've prepared some opening remarks, provide an overview of
that year, uh,
and to comment on areas that, uh, we, the, that
of focus that we have is real estate, uh,
real estate conduct regulator.
So this will take about 10 minutes, um,
because I think, you know, if you wanna ask questions,
we need to leave the room for them. Yeah.
So, um, I think, um, if you keep them really short,
I would say if there's lots to cover,
maybe max like three, two to three minutes.
So then you can cover rest in the, in, uh,
Answer questions. So you'd like me to
Keep your opening remarks brief,
so if you take up 10 minutes, there won't be enough time
for members, uh, for questions.
So if you keep them to three minutes or so, three
or four minutes, that should be sufficient.
Um, alright. Thank you.
I'll do my best to, uh, to do it that way.
So, um, you
presumably know
that we're a Crown agent established under the act,
and that our purpose is to protect the interests
of consumers engaging in real estate transactions
and to promote public confidence in the profession.
And so we carry out our re regulatory
responsibilities in a number of ways.
Uh, we, we, we do the licensing work.
We oversee the code of conduct.
Uh, we provide guidance and education to the profession.
Uh, we deal about, we deal with the whole complaint system,
uh, so that, uh, we can hold licensees
to account for, for, for, uh, for
bad behavior essentially.
And lastly, uh, we are there to protect
and promote the interests of consumers being a consumer
agency, consumer protection agency, as well
as a conduct regulator.
So, two strengths to what we do.
Um, we've got a very good website called Settled, uh,
and that, uh, that is a very good tool for, uh,
prospective purchases to use.
So we do our best to promote that
the year we're talking about 2324.
Uh, it was notable for a number of reasons, um,
probably don't need to tell you that the economic conditions
are challenging, uh, have been since that year.
And that slower market puts a lot
of pressure on the, a the, uh, agents
and the consumers.
So while the residential stocks are increased,
the sales are slow.
And, uh, we have to, uh, the, the
profession has to manage consumer expectations,
uh, and that that can be quite
an recalling market.
So what that's meant for us, actually is a very large
increase in the number of complaints
that we've had to manage.
So I will give you a few numbers.
Uh, 361 complaints, uh,
in the, the year we're looking at, uh, compared with
252, uh, in the 22 3 year.
And, uh, the, the, the, they're continuing
to increase at a pace.
Um, we saw in the year we are looking at, uh,
cases involving some complex issues.
Uh, so that all goes
to slow down the process.
So one of our big initiatives has been
to, um, review our complaints
process, uh, to see if we can streamline it and refine it
and become more efficient.
And we, uh, have done a,
a good job of doing that.
Um, unfortunately, uh, what, what it's,
we are coming up against a wall of a huge wall
of complaints at the time, same time as we are trying to get
through, um, a bit of a backlog.
So that's, uh, and I think we are rising to the challenge,
but, uh, look, the, the good news is the, we, we know that
this complaint environment is probably going to be around,
and so we call it the new normal.
And we'll probably, uh, it'll probably change at some point,
but right now that we, we are dealing with a, a lot
of disappointed people, I'd say.
Um, so just to give you a,
uh, we, we've, we've actually getting
through more complaints
and we are also reducing the time it takes to do them.
Uh, so just to give you some figures, um,
the, the year we're looking at,
we did 3 11 3, 311 complaints.
And in the year prior to that, we did 253.
And this year we've done 487, um,
which I think shows our, uh,
increase in efficiencies given the volume keeps coming in.
But, but, but we, we are really focusing on that
and, uh, you know, doing workforce planning, whatever we can
to keep it down, which is challenging also
without, uh, and to do that
and live within our budget concerns, uh, without,
within our, within our budget constraints, should I say.
So we, we've been fiscally responsible,
but we are aware that we have this, uh, this
complaint environment, which is quite difficult
and, you know, puts pressure on people that are doing it.
So you expect, you might expect that that, uh,
licensing numbers would reduced a lot in the environment.
Well, in that year, uh, reduced by only 2.9%.
Um, and that included
1,710 new licensees joining.
And this year, uh, the number has increased again, uh,
the overall number to 15,692.
And that's despite the challenging conditions.
So we've delivered a, we an effective CPD program,
and that is, uh, it seems
to be from the survey evidence we have, it seems to be, uh,
meeting requirements within the profession.
Um, we had a lift, uh, of,
to 72% following
67% in the previous year.
Um, and, and again, we've got this year's results
and it's now gone to 78%.
So it's getting towards
where we think it will, will, will be.
Um, it should mention that, that, that, that,
that there is a judicial review of our decision
to mandate A CPD copy on understanding the needs
and interests of Maori called, yeah.
Uh, the, the hearing was June, 2024.
We got a, a positive decision from the high court,
but it's under, under appeal,
so really can't say too much more, um, thank you.
About the court process.
Yeah. Thank you. So, um,
it looks like you have prepared quite a bit
to present to the committee.
Is it possible for you to provide, um, that yeah,
that presentation to the committee so
that then committee can read through
and can include any questions in the post hearing in
Christians so that we can start with Christians now?
Yeah, I'm sorry that I wasn't able to, um, to,
to do it all as quickly as you.
No, no, no, no.
I think you've covered quite a bit, so,
and this will be useful for questions.
Thank you very much. That's very good.
Thank you members. Um, please, um,
Thank you. Um,
thank you for, um, your time today.
Look, I wanna pick up on the, um, complaints process. Yes.
You've just referred to, um,
and, you know, commend you on the, the speed resolution
for some of those complaints.
Yeah. Um, but you don't wanna necessarily close
the door completely right.
And turn people off from a process just
because you wanna have, have a quick resolution,
that's not the right thing to do on in all circumstances.
No. So what sort of metrics do you have
around the timeliness of decision making
and acknowledging that, um, sometimes, you know,
like matters before you just being tribunal, for example,
is a little bit more advanced than a,
a complaints assessment committee process.
So what metrics around timeliness for
Resolution? Well, I'll start that one
and hand over to Belinda.
Uh, so at the moment, if you, if it goes to a CAC,
then the average time is 110 days.
And if it, uh, um,
if it doesn't now Belinda, you can take that. I think,
Yeah, we, our aim is to, the registrar has certain powers
to triage and or resolve a complaint, so we try
to use those powers within three months
of receiving the complaint
because that can require a resolution process,
making sure we received information.
Sure. If it then goes to a CAC, our aspiration is for it
to be dealt with within nine months.
And that's the target. We are not, we are not achieving yet.
Uh, and at the,
and so the pre CAC times have come down from about 150 days
to now about 115.
Um, our CA, if a case goes to the CAC
or, um, on average, it is still taking over a year.
And that is what we are really working hard to bring down.
Um, I would add
that in this period we were having quite a big turnover
of our CAC members, so we were having
to upskill a new panel.
Um, they've all worked really hard
and we working hard with the CAC members to support them
to determine these cases more swiftly.
Equally, we're asking parties to be more responsive
to their submission obligations to work within timelines.
Uh, but obviously natural justice is very important.
So it's a balance.
Yes. Well, well, the, the legislative process that we have
to follow under the act is, uh,
doesn't result in particularly strict conclusions.
It's quite a thorough process
with every CAC having three members on,
and those three members having to do an investigation
and come to a decision.
So, and, and, and there's lots of toing and froing.
Now we are doing our best to refine it.
We have some ideas to, for dealing with
that in, in different ways.
But, but that's in process.
I should add that the systems upgrade, um, I, I think will,
will, will make a step change. Mm-hmm.
And so, can I respond just briefly?
You did ask for metrics, and I was just checking my notes.
We did, in the 2024 year, we completed 81%
of the formal complaints across all
categories, um, within a year.
So can I just follow up briefly? Thank you.
Um, have you thought though about formalizing that sort
of measurement on an annual basis so that you might,
you might have aspirational, you know, sort of desires
to hit a particular target, but,
and appreciate that there might be some systemic changes
happening, but to what extent are you looking
to formalize some of those changes?
So our statement of performance expectations,
in fact over many years
and including this year, does have a tar the targets
to complete complaints
before the CAC process within three months
to complete the CAC process within nine months.
And those are the targets we are working towards
and we've published, um,
and people are holding us to account for that.
Yeah, so, so, so just to summarize,
we've got the legislative process.
We can't do very much about what would be
hard to, um, so we've got the systems, processes
and systems that we use to deal with it
as sufficiently as possible.
And then there are, is the people
who are actually on the ground doing it
and making sure we have enough resource there.
So that's, that's probably summarizes it. Mm-hmm.
A atory from Dr. Ham. Thank you.
Um, there's been an increase of 43%, um, of, of complaints.
What's, what's actually drive driving that?
I'll start, start that one off.
Um, we, we think it is a market conditions,
uh, that, that are in play at the moment
because, uh, we've got a lot
of sellers who don't like the fact
that the prices have tumbled.
And in Auckland they've tumbled quite a lot. Hmm.
Uh, so that, and then, so, and you've got,
and then you've got the agent trying to manage
that expectation.
And I think that it's a sort of recipe for something
to not go wrong unless it's very careful
and considered management and manage the expectations.
And I would say as well, Mr. Campbell, that, um,
there is more awareness of REA
and that we are available to receive people's concerns.
Um, as I said, we are,
we have seen quite a big increase in lower level concerns,
which we use in triage powers to deal with,
which can be disappointing for some of our consumers,
which we, we acknowledge,
but we have to use the system effectively.
I think overall there is also just generally
a consumer sentiment.
People are wanting to raise their concerns
and, uh, we are seeing it across other, um,
conduct regulators and dispute resolution agencies.
Um, so there's a general increase in, in complaints.
Um, and what we have noticed in particular is just a less,
less willingness to want to resolve.
People want to see a determination and an outcome.
So that's why the formal complaint has come to us to, just
to add to that 1, 1 1, 1, 1 thing we are doing
with the sector is we are saying to them it's,
it is a tough market.
Consumers need great customer service, so we're asking them
to use their internal complaints systems well to try
to resolve put right things where they can so
that we are focusing on the most important issues.
Yes. Because I should just add that there's been this,
this is a reluctance often to use the, the,
the in-house complaints resolution system
and come straight to REA
and in many of cases I think they could be dealt
with in house.
So, and you might have just touched on, um,
and already, um,
and I will know there's,
what about 96,000 real estate sales a year?
Complaints are, what, 361 in the period?
So it is, there's a small percentage Yes.
Of, of, um, things, uh,
are you taking any proactive steps to try
and reduce complaints actually getting to, to actually
that level or any kind of, uh, preventative steps to kind
of prevent Yeah.
People having these complaints? Can
I, Yes.
Um, we have a, we, we, we are, we,
we have a two pronged approach at REA.
Because of our statute, we are here
to lift confidence in the sector, which means we have
to work really hard with the, the sector to help them know
what their, what their obligations are.
And we are here to help consumers.
So we provide consumers with a lot of information
through settled because the transaction is complex.
And often, and most of our complaints are in residential
and many people only encounter a transaction
once in their lifetime or maybe every 10 years.
So we support the consumer to understand the system
and set all our website's key for that.
The second one is our education program.
The information we give to our sector
through our newsletters, uh, through our website,
helps 'em understand what are the most important issues.
We publish the complaint themes, we say, this is
where you really need to focus.
And we have a really strong engagement program
with our sector, uh, to meet with our sec the sector leaders
to say, this is what we are seeing, this is what we need you
to focus on in your agencies to ensure that the issues
that are the subject of complaint have been dealt with.
So it's a two-prong working with consumers
and the sector. Mm-hmm.
Uh, uh, so, uh, from me on that, uh, is there a breakdown
of, um, nature of complaints, uh, available?
Uh, we, we can make it available in terms
of the percentage across the themes in our annual report,
we pub published the top five, uh, themes.
Yeah. Um, we haven't put as scribes it according to, um,
the percentage that relates to it,
but they certainly are the top five, um, complaint themes
that we can provide that information of the, the, um,
thank you committee would like that
To stand it for the sake of completeness that, uh,
lawyers don't tend to get involved
until there's a signed agreement.
And, uh, by that time, uh, if there's gonna be damage,
it's the time timely damage will have been done by.
Um, so that's the sort of focus that,
uh, is that time. Mm-hmm.
Alright. Uh, you from
Georgia Cord and, um, thank you for allowing me
to join Madam Chair through, um, the hearing.
Um, I'm interested in weather tightness issues
and those issues that have been in the media recently
around, um, lack of disclosure by an agent.
I wanted to ask you about whether you have explored changes
in the rules, um, that apply to your organization, um,
to bring, um, either discipline action
or to allow guidance for situations like in the media now
where a salesperson has been required under rule 10.7
to, um, make available information that's disclosed
to them about whether tightness drop the listing
because they were instructed not to pass that on
to potential buyers.
And then another sales person has picked that up.
That seems like a very clear lacuna here, um,
where we are allowing salespeople to take on, um,
listings where others don't.
And so in the interest of your organization
and preserving, um, observ the, the professional conduct
of those people who don't take on listings
where they see an issue, um, to then be under others,
It is one of the biggest challenges
and one of the biggest frustrations for the sector to see
that when you are a licensee who is instructed not
to disclose a defect, which is an obligation as you said,
but we say you have to walk away
because you can't mislead the consumer.
And so when they see it, uh, the same property being, uh,
uh, sale marketed down the road
and they don't see that disclosure they have,
that is a misconduct issue
and under our rules, they ought to be reporting that to us.
So that, so that is where the system is
intended to catch that.
Um, it doesn't happen and it doesn't happen every time.
Sometimes we do get reports that, uh,
another agency is promoting a property that is clearly, um,
does have clearly have weather tightness issues.
The difficulty is when there's a hidden defect
because the disclosure of if the, if the second sales person
has not been given the information
and the vendor has withheld it, uh, then there,
then there is a challenge for a potential buyer.
But then the potential buyer, which is what we do
with the buyers, is to say, you must do your due diligence.
You must get a voting report.
You should look at the limb,
you should make sure you've done a very good inquiry.
Um, and then there are obviously some warranties under the
sale and purchase agreement, but the reporting requirement
is where we try to catch that, that I guess
what you'd call a lacuna.
Yeah. And it is a but it is, it is a challenge.
And as I say, we would say that's a conduct issue.
If someone picks up a listing
and doesn't, doesn't disclose a weather,
an obvious weather tightness issue, then
that is a conduct issue that we would like
to think would come to us.
I guess what I'm asking is, yes,
there is a contact issue there,
but we know that, um, the, you know,
prosecutions under this, not prosecutions,
but disciplinary issues under, under these sorts
of rules are few and far between.
And so, um, another way to deal
with this would be the organization advocating
for a change which required proactive disclosure rather than
making it an offense to fail to disclose.
Um, have you explored, um, whether
that would deal with this issue?
Because I imagine that in the case that I'm talking about,
it's a well-publicized case.
The Bailey's agent who dropped the listing
and then the Barefoots agent that picked it up,
there's some disquiet amongst the industry
between those sellers who will drop the listing
and then the sellers who will pick
It up. So I can't
look, it's really
difficult and I have to be very careful.
Can't, we can't comment on the specifics of that case.
Um, obviously it's what these matters can do come to us.
I mean there the rules do have a,
a proactive disclosure obligation.
The rules expect that a, um, that a,
that a licensee must know the property
and must disclose any defects which are reasonably competent
licensee would identify, um,
or they must disclose information which in fairness
to the parties ought to be disclosed.
So there are these two conduct obligations that do exist.
Yes. Um, but I, I, I take, I acknowledge your question
and I'd like to consider that further with our, our team,
um, and to,
to look at whether there is any additional guidance we can
be, we can be providing to the sector.
Yeah. Well you de essentially dealing
with the set behavior on the part of the seller
and uh, but,
but it does lead on, as you say, that we,
we can't control what,
we can't control what the seller does. Okay.
Alright. Okay. Um, Scott will,
Yeah.
Yeah. Chair. Um, so you've talked about the,
the new normal of complaints mm-hmm.
The complaint with, I'm, I'm wondering
what you think this might, where, where it sits in
what you think this might result from, sort
of seems like a bit of a lack of civility in society,
but you know, I mean if, if are, are there,
are there complaints about cowboy activities
or are they, are they, are they justified
or you know, in general, can you give us a sense
or are they stresses that might be causing it?
I I mean I'm, I'm interested.
We have thought we have, we have thought about
that quite a lot and Belinda has spoken about it a lot.
So would you like to take,
One of the points that Denise
and I talked about that Denise was to make was
that while we've seen this substantial increase in
complaints, we've actually ly seen a reduction
in the findings of misconduct.
So we've had in the past 20%, then it fell to 16%.
And as we become aware of more
the conduct issues we are finding is less, which I,
I think we would say that's the regulatory system working
as it ought to, is that most
of our sector is really working hard to meet the standards,
but there are still some that are not.
So we are, our role is still very important.
Um, so I think that is, you know, that is one of the,
that is, that is one of the trends that, that we don't have.
We think the regulatory system
that was put in place in 2008 has really made a,
an important impact.
Um, and that our most of our sector is working really hard.
Um, they say we, we are not seeing a, a,
a significant increase in very, very bad behavior,
but there is still some, and that's where we have to act.
Mm-hmm. And that's why we have to clear that, make sure we,
we we triage the cases to focus on those most cases. Well,
Well there is, and I don't have the percentage, uh,
and it might be available, but a, a lot, a lot
of the cases are, um,
there's really essentially a finding that, um, there's not,
not enough to warrant a complaint.
Uh, and I think that that, that in itself, uh,
creates tension.
Um, many people think they've got a valid complaint,
they haven't, not enough
to justify going through the system.
And, uh, I just get back to, uh, to
how, how real estate professionals to try to deal with this.
And that is by carefully managing expectations
in the first place and, and communicate
and communicating.
Belinda mentioned giving, you know, this, this, this
environment requires professionals
to give really good customer service.
That's the key.
So I guess what the figures don't tell us is
that they're more complex situation
where there might be an improvement in behavior and,
and that you are seeing in the sector,
but also possibly a lag
and a less tolerant, less tolerant consumers who,
who expect things to be better
and possibly a perception of a,
a poor perception of, of the sector that leads them
to expect that that outcome.
Is that something that, I mean that
that if you're talking about this mismatch and,
and you're seeing improved outcomes,
but an increase in complaints that are not actually
Justified or Yeah, that's,
That's in, in our measures, we do report, one
of our measures is to report the percentage
of misconduct findings.
So it is an SPE measure to the point I was asked before.
So it is a, it is a measure that we report.
Um, but I acknowledge your, your observation
that may be our report could demonstrate more
because we do, we do often, um, what in,
in our annual report, we do report on the complaint outcomes
and we do report on, for example, the number
of misconduct cases taken to the tribunal.
So people will see the licensing numbers, the 15,000,
and then they'll see those complaint outcomes from tribunals
being quite small, that if your observation is,
we could tell that performance story more in our in report.
That's, that's a useful observation.
Um, in terms of a less tolerant consumer, it's interesting.
I, I would like to think that the consumer has a, as a voice
and that our system is enabling that voice to be heard.
Because as Denise said, the fact
that it may not justify regulatory intervention
or a misconduct finding doesn't mean
that a consumer doesn't feel
that a better job could have been done.
Mm-hmm. And it doesn't mean
that they didn't receive the best
information in a timely way.
Mm-hmm. So often a lot of the work that, um, my head
of regulatory services, who's with me today,
his team worked really hard to do, is to communicate a lot
of information to our consumers.
And so at an early stage they are given bit quite a lot
of guidance because Denise said it's often after the event.
Um, alright. Um, any question from Dr. De?
Just, just one and sorry that we keep focusing on, um,
thanks, but jump up.
It's one of our major tasks. Yeah, I did.
Um, simple question.
Um, could you make a comment
around trust in the process from the
people from the complainants
Trust in the process, In the process?
So when they get to the end of it,
and there may be people that are aggre, there may be others
that go, that's fair.
So what sort of trust do people have?
I think there's some survey evidence around
That. Yeah, so
look, we do, um,
and we can just turn to those pages in, in the notes,
but we, we are pleased that overall consumer and licensee,
but focus on the consumer.
'cause it is hard to be told we are not
gonna take your case forward.
And we do work really hard to, to try
and do that in an empathetic way.
Unfortunately, our act gives us the power to close a cons,
a complaint when the act says it's inconsequential.
We don't like that word because it's not
inconsequential to that person.
Yeah. So we do try to explain whether it's
because we don't have evidence or
because it's not sufficiently serious we do that.
But, um, consumers, our survey for this year
that we were looking at said that 76%
of consumers have confidence
that the real estate industry is well regulated.
And we think that's a pretty positive result.
And those are people who have bought
or sold in the 12 months.
Um, 87, 80 7% of consumers feel empowered
to participate effectively in real estate transactions.
And we have to say those who've seen our settled website,
the number goes even higher.
Um, 92% of licensees, um, in our,
in our licensee survey found
that the compliance guidance we give is useful.
And 74% of the sector, uh, thinks we are well regulated.
And I'm sure that there would be no regulator
that would have a, a very high number
of their regulated population.
But we think those are reasonably good.
Good confidence results. I
Think we should just say about supervision.
Yes. So I just, um, conferring, uh,
I think, I think the, um, we are trying
to emphasize the importance of supervision
in the whole process and the,
and by the firms
that they've got proper supervision in there.
Uh, 'cause that's monitoring the quality control,
which is also monitoring the sort of behavior set that are,
um, likely to happen.
And I think that those supervisors provide the leadership
and knowledge and guidances so, so very much needed by those
who are starting out.
So there were sort of a supplementary, so
We'll have to stop there.
So I think, uh, thank you so much, Denise.
Thank you Belinda. And if you, uh, are okay to provide copy
of your presentation that you want, um, due
to the committee, that would be really helpful
and there might be some, uh, questions, uh,
sent pledge on as well
To you. Thank you. So thank
you very much for,
for having us, uh, here today.
It's much Thank
You. You very much.